> Hash Table

- It is used to store key-value pairs.

- They are like arrays, but the keys are not ordered.

- Unlike arrays, hash tables are fast for all of the following operations :
    - finding values
    - adding new values
    - removing values

- To implement a hash table, we'll use an array.

- In order to look up values by key, we need a way to convert keys into valid array indices.
- A fn. that performs this task is called hash function.


> What makes a good hash function ? ( not a cryptographically secure one)

- Fast (i.e. constan time)

- Doesn't cluster outputs at specific indices, but distributes unifromly

- Deterministic (same i/p yields same o/p)


> Simple hash function :

```
function hash(key, arrayLen) {
    let total = 0;

    for (let i=0; i<key.length; i++) {
        let char = key[i];
        let value = char.chartCodeAt(0) - 96;
        total = (total + value) % arraylen;
    }

    return total;
}
```

- Issues in our simple hash fn. :
    - Only hashes string (not the worry at the moment)
    - Not constan time (linear in key length)
    - Could be a little more random


> Better hash function :

```
function hash(key, arrayLen) {
    let total = 0;
    let WEIRD_PRIME = 31;

    for (let i=0; i < Math.min(key.length, 100); i++) {
        let char = key[i];
        let value = char.chartCodeAt(0) - 96;
        total = (total * WEIRD_PRIME + value) % arraylen;
    }

    return total;
}
```

- The prime number in the hash is useful in spreading out the keys more uniformly.

- Its also helpful if array that we're putting values into has a prime length.


> Dealing with collisions 

- Even with large array and a great hash function, collisions are inevitable.

- To deal with collisions :
    - Separate chaining
    - Linear Probing

- With Separate chaining
    - at each index in our array we store values using a more sophisticated data structure(array or linked list)

    size: 6
    'darkblue' -> 4
    'salmon' -> 4
    Both of them are stored at index 4 : [['darkblue', '#00008b'], ['salmon', '#fa8072']]


- With Linear probing
    - when we finf a collision, we search through the array to find the next empty slot

    - Unlike separate chaining, this allows us to store a single key-value pair at each index

    - Once, the array fills up we will have to increase array length or combine keys at a single index

    size : 10
    'darkblue' -> 4 -> stored at index 4
    'salmon' -> 4 -> stored at next available slot i.e. 5
    'tomato' -> 4 -> stored at next available slot i.e. 6